P1 process (#1751)
giantswarm/docs: src/content/support/p1-process/index.md

---
linkTitle: P1 Incident Process
title: P1 incident process
description: The process used by the Giant Swarm support team when a priority one incident is called.
weight: 100
menu:
  main:
    parent: overview
    weight: 20
user_questions:
  - What process does Giant Swarm follow in case of critical incidents?
owner:
  - https://github.com/orgs/giantswarm/teams/teddyfriends
last_review_date: 2023-05-15
---

After years of handling critical enterprise workloads in production, we have hardened our incident process based on our learnings. In this document we focus on critical incidents, called `Priority 1` (P1) incidents, though some of the steps could be part of regular incidents too. 

> Giant Swarm classifies incidents as being either critical (`P1` or routine (`P2`). Critical incidents are those which impair a customer production system. Routine incidents are all other regular incidents which don't impact production and which have a straightforward process.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Giant Swarm classifies incidents as being either critical (`P1`) or routine (`P2`). Critical incidents are those which impair a customer production system. Routine incidents are all other regular incidents which don't impact production and which have a straightforward process.
```

The Incident Coordinator (IC) holds the high-level state about the incident. They structure the incident response, assigning responsibilities according to need and priority. De facto, the IC holds all positions/responsibilities that they have not delegated. If appropriate, they can remove roadblocks that prevent Operations Engineers from working most effectively.

The IC is the public face of our incident response. It is within the ICs duty to issue periodic updates to the team involved - both customer teams and within Giant Swarm - to act as the bridge between the customer and the team. The IC will need to be in the war rooms of our customers. For that reason, we have created a [Opsgenie team](https://support.atlassian.com/opsgenie/docs/what-are-teams-in-opsgenie/) grouping all members that can act as Incident Coordinators. 

If there is a dedicated IC, the IC isn’t debugging systems and keeps the focus on coordinating the team to do so, while managing the customer communication.

### Operations Engineer

The Operations Engineer (OE) works with the Incident Coordinator to respond to the incident and is the one responsible for debugging and applying changes to a system. 

> In case of Operations Engineers, we have different [Opsgenie teams](https://support.atlassian.com/opsgenie/docs/what-are-teams-in-opsgenie/) sliced by area that are oncall in a given day.

Reviewer: this is arguably somewhat more complicated - we have both teams during the day, and areas at night

Author: yeah I simplify it on purpose. Anyway I am open for suggestions if you would like to describe it further

![Incident.io Escalate Screenshot](escalate_screenshot.png)

### Investigate

Once the team is built, the person assigned to the Operations Engineer role will carry on with the investigation. The Incident Coordinator will be in contact with the customer, via messaging or in a call, and will provide information to the Operator to help with the investigation.

__Note__: In exceptional occasions the person who acknowledges the alert can manage the communication and fix the problem at the same time, but once it is the case make sure customer is aware of the measures have been implemented to solved the issue.

> We leave space for the Operations Engineers to focus on the investigation, but we establish 20 minutes intervals to get back and inform the customer of the current state. Most of the time, the OEs will share the findings in the channel and the IC can pin those messages to help track the actions performed.

Reviewer: We have 20 minutes intervals here, and then later that incident.io is updating every 30 minutes?

Author: yeah let's say 30 minutes

By default, every 30 minutes [incident.io](https://incident.io/) will remind you to share the update with customer or report any progress on the incident channel.

### Fixing

After we have found the root cause of the problem we implement a solution to avoid any more downtime for the customer service. Most of the time, the solution is temporary and will be replaced once the actual fix is rolled out to the platform. Once, we have identified the cause and we our fixing the problem we update the incident channel status to `Fixing` (using `/inc update`). Same command can be use to update the summary once there any progress on the issue.

### Monitoring

Once the fix or workaround has been implemented, IC communicates with the customer and move the incident status to monitoring phase, where we stay in standby, the OE keeps an eye on the metrics and communication channel to confirm there is no regression. We leave the incident in this state for some time, which could be a day or two, until we agree with the customer there is no regression.  

### Closing up

> When we close the incident the work is not yet finished. The IC creates a [PostMortem](https://docs.giantswarm.io/support/overview/#postmortem-process) document to detail all information collected during the incident and shares with the customer. The [incident.io](https://incident.io/) functionality allows you to generate a Google Doc Post Mortem filling most of the parts with the metadata and pinned messages gathered during the incident. The dedicated Account Engineer of the customer will do a review and ask for feedback to any of the participants in the incident.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When we close the incident the work is not yet finished. The IC creates a [Postmortem](https://docs.giantswarm.io/support/overview/#postmortem-process) document to detail all information collected during the incident and shares with the customer. The [incident.io](https://incident.io/) functionality allows you to generate a Google Doc Post Mortem filling most of the parts with the metadata and pinned messages gathered during the incident. The dedicated Account Engineer of the customer will do a review and ask for feedback to any of the participants in the incident.
```

---
linkTitle: P1 Incident Process
title: Critical incident process
description: How Giant Swarm support team react to P1 incidents.
weight: 100
menu:
  main:
    parent: overview
    weight: 20
user_questions:
  - What process does Giant Swarm follow in case of critical incidents?
owner:
  - https://github.com/orgs/giantswarm/teams/teddyfriends

> last_review_date: 2023-04-11

Author: ```suggestion
last_review_date: 2023-04-25
```

The process can be broken down in these steps:

1. [Identify](#identify)
2. [Investigate](#investigate)
3. [Fixing](#fixing)
4. [Monitoring](#monitoring)
5. [Closing up](#closing-up)

### Identify

First step is to identify the incident and understand the severity. In our case, there are three possible sources:

- Alert received pointing to a impaired production system
- Customer sent us a urgent email 
- Customer reached us via Slack

Once our engineer acknowledge the message we need to confirm the severity to trigger the P1 process. In case the customer paged us, the Giant Swarm engineer joins the call or thread to verify the severity. In case an alert paged us, the engineer connects to the platform and measure the impact.

Once the criticality is confirmed we continue the workflow by [declaring an Incident](https://help.incident.io/en/articles/5947915-declaring-incidents), which creates a Slack incident channel and triggers a custom [workflow](https://help.incident.io/en/articles/6971329-getting-started-with-workflows) that drives the engineer through the next steps. 

> When the incident is created there are some data the engineer must fill in (short summary, severity and customer impacted). When severity is `Critical` (P1 incident) the first thing to do is building the team. Most of the times the engineer creating the channel is not part of the [Incident Coordinators Group]() so he needs to escalate it to get someone from that team. For that reason, when you create an incident channel, incident.io show you a button to escalate. In the end, we need at least two person team to manage a critical incident (communications and operations).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When the incident is created there is some data that the engineer must fill in (short summary, severity and customer impacted). When severity is `Critical` (P1 incident) the first thing to do is building the team. Most of the times the engineer creating the channel is not part of the [Incident Coordinators Group]() so he needs to escalate it to get someone from that team. For that reason, when you create an incident channel, incident.io show you a button to escalate. In the end, we need at least two person team to manage a critical incident (communications and operations).
```

Reviewer 2: @pipo02mix how about adding a screenshot of the data that needs to be filled in and the escalation?

### Investigate

> Once team is built the person assigned to the Operations Engineer role will carry on with the investigation. The Incident Coordinator will be in contact with the customer, via messaging or in a call, and will provide information to the Operator to help with the investigation.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Once the team is built the person assigned to the Operations Engineer role will carry on with the investigation. The Incident Coordinator will be in contact with the customer, via messaging or in a call, and will provide information to the Operator to help with the investigation.
```

> We leave space to the Operations Engineers to focus on the investigation but we establish 20 minutes periods to get back and inform on the state. Most of the times the OEs share the findings in the channel and IC pin those message to help tracking the actions performed.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We leave space to the Operations Engineers to focus on the investigation but we establish 20 minutes periods to get back and inform the customer on the state. Most of the time the OEs will share the findings in the channel and the IC can pin those message to help tracking the actions performed.
```

> In case the Incident Coordinator realize we need to grow the group, he can always escalate to more memebers of the team using incident.io commands.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In case the Incident Coordinator realize we need to grow the group, he can always escalate to more members of the team using incident.io commands.
```

### Fixing

After we have found the root cause of the problem we implement a solution, which can be temporal, to avoid any more damage the customer service.

### Monitoring

Once the fix or workaround has been implemented, we communicate with the customer and move to a monitoring phase, where we stay in stand-by keeping an eye on the metrics and communication channel to confirm there is no a regression coming. We leave the incident in this state for some time, could be a day or two, till we agree with the customer there is no regression.  

### Closing up

> When we close the incident the work is not yet finished. We write down a [PostMortem]() document to detail all information collected through the incndent and share with the customer. We usually create follow ups that convert in tickets to our product teams so we can improve our service and avoid same mistake twice.

Reviewer 2: Who is responsible of writing the postmortem?

Reviewer 3: Maybe some collaborative effort?
- Incident coordinator writes the high overview.
- One or more operations engineers write deeper details about the issues they have debugged and fixed.

---
linkTitle: P1 Incident Process

> title: Critical incident process

Author: I did not like acronyms in the title

> title: Critical incident process

Reviewer 4: I'd +1 Joe here because folks will be looking for "P1"

> title: Critical incident process

Author: ```suggestion
title: P1 incident process
```

> description: How Giant Swarm support team react to P1 incidents.
> weight: 100
> menu:
>   main:
>     parent: overview
>     weight: 20
> user_questions:
>   - What process does Giant Swarm follow in case of critical incidents?
> owner:
>   - https://github.com/orgs/giantswarm/teams/teddyfriends
> last_review_date: 2023-04-25

Author: ```suggestion
description: Critical Incident Process description followed by the Giant Swarm support team when a priority one incident is called.
weight: 100
menu:
  main:
    parent: overview
    weight: 20
user_questions:
  - What process does Giant Swarm follow in case of critical incidents?
owner:
  - https://github.com/orgs/giantswarm/teams/teddyfriends
last_review_date: 2023-04-24
```

---

> After years of handling critical enterprise workloads in production, we have hardened our incident process based on our learnings. In this document we focus on critical incidents, called `Priority 1` (P1) incidents, though some of the steps could be part of regular incidents too. Giant Swarm classify incidents in a simple manner, critical incidents when a production system is impaired or regular incidents which have a straightforward process.

Reviewer: I think we need to review the voice through most of this doc - if it's meant to be for "internal" usage, it feels strange to say stuff like "Giant Swarm classify incidents" -> it (and other areas throughout) should rad more like "We classify incidents..."

Author: Well as it will be public I wanted to write it in formal way

## Separation of Responsibilities

> It’s important to make sure that everybody involved in an incident knows their role, what is expected from them and doesn’t conflict with others actions. Somewhat counterintuitively, a clear separation of responsibilities allows individuals more autonomy, as they do not need to ask all the time and coordinate actions.

Author: ```suggestion
It’s important to make sure that everybody involved in an incident knows their role, what is expected from them and that it doesn’t conflict with others' responsibilities. Somewhat counterintuitively, a clear separation of responsibilities allows individuals more autonomy, as they do not need to ask all the time and coordinate actions.
```

> It’s important to make sure that everybody involved in an incident knows their role, what is expected from them and that it doesn’t conflict with others' responsibilities. Somewhat counterintuitively, a clear separation of responsibilities allows individuals more autonomy, as they do not need to ask all the time and coordinate actions.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
It’s important to make sure that everybody involved in an incident knows their role, what is expected from them, and that it doesn’t conflict with others' responsibilities. Somewhat counterintuitively, a clear separation of responsibilities allows individuals more autonomy, as they do not need to ask all the time and coordinate actions.
```

### Roles

At Giant Swarm we have two defined roles: Incident Coordinators and Operations Engineers.

### Incident Coordinator

The Incident Coordinator (IC) holds the high-level state about the incident. They structure the incident response, assigning responsibilities according to need and priority. De facto, the IC holds all positions/responsibilities that they have not delegated. If appropriate, they can remove roadblocks that prevent Operations Engineers from working most effectively.

The IC is the public face of our incident response. It is within the ICs duty to issue periodic updates to the team involved - both customer teams and within Giant Swarm - to act as the bridge between the customer and the team. The IC will need to be in the war rooms of our customers.

If there is a dedicated IC, the IC isn’t debugging systems and keeps the focus on coordinating the team to do so, while managing our customers.

### Operations Engineer

> The Operations Engineer (OE) works with the incident coordinator to respond to the incident and is the only one debugging and applying changes to a system.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The Operations Engineer (OE) works with the Incident Coordinator to respond to the incident and is the one responsible for debugging and applying changes to a system.
```

## P1 Incident Process

> The process starts from the well-known [Incident Command System](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Incident_Command_System) used by US firefighters to manage emergency situations. Obviously we have adapted to manage developer platforms. 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The process is inspired by the well-known [Incident Command System](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Incident_Command_System) used by US firefighters to manage emergency situations. Obviously we have adapted to manage developer platforms. 
```

> Our main tenet is to have a simple process integrated with our incident tooling ([Incident.io](https://incident.io/)) to simplify the life of our engineers. Once a critical incident is declared none wants to read a process but be driving by it. 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Our main tenet is to have a simple process integrated with our incident tooling ([Incident.io](https://incident.io/)) to simplify the life of our engineers. Once a critical incident is declared, nobody wants to read a process, but be driven by it. 
```

Our main tenet is to have a simple process integrated with our incident tooling ([Incident.io](https://incident.io/)) to simplify the life of our engineers. Once a critical incident is declared none wants to read a process but be driving by it. 

The process can be broken down in these steps:

1. [Identify](#identify)
2. [Investigate](#investigate)
3. [Fixing](#fixing)
4. [Monitoring](#monitoring)
5. [Closing up](#closing-up)

### Identify

> First step is to identify the incident and understand the severity. In our case, there are three possible sources:

Author: ```suggestion
First step is to identify the incident and understand its impact and severity. In our case, there are three possible sources:
```

> - Alert received pointing to a impaired production system

Author: ```suggestion
- Alert received pointing to an impacted production system
```

> - Customer sent us a urgent email 

Author: ```suggestion
- Customer sent us an urgent email urgen[at]ginatswarm.io
```

> - Customer reached us via Slack

Author: ```suggestion
- Customer reached out via Slack
```

> - Customer sent us an urgent email (urgent[at]ginatswarm.io)

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- Customer sent us an urgent email
```
Typo, but also I'd not publish the address publicly so we don't get noise there

> Once our engineer acknowledge the message we need to confirm the severity to trigger the P1 process. In case the customer paged us, the Giant Swarm engineer joins the call or thread to verify the severity. In case an alert paged us, the engineer connects to the platform and measure the impact.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Once our engineer acknowledges the message we need to confirm the severity to trigger the P1 process. In case the customer paged us, the Giant Swarm engineer joins the call or thread to verify the severity. In case an alert paged us, the engineer connects to the platform and assesses the impact.
```

Once the criticality is confirmed we continue the workflow by [declaring an Incident](https://help.incident.io/en/articles/5947915-declaring-incidents), which creates a Slack incident channel and triggers a custom [workflow](https://help.incident.io/en/articles/6971329-getting-started-with-workflows) that drives the engineer through the next steps. 

> When the incident is created there is some data that the engineer must fill in (short summary, severity and customer impacted). When severity is `Critical` (P1 incident) the first thing to do is building the team. Most of the times the engineer creating the channel is not part of the [Incident Coordinators Group](https://giantswarm.app.opsgenie.com/teams/dashboard/f02504a3-83d4-4ea8-b55c-8c67756f9b2e/main) so he needs to escalate it to get someone from that team. For that reason, when you create an incident channel, incident.io show you a button to escalate. In the end, we need at least two person team to manage a critical incident (communications and operations).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
When the incident is created, there is some data that the engineer must fill in (short summary, severity and customer impacted). When the severity is `Critical` (P1 incident) the first thing to do is build the team. Most of the time, the engineer creating the channel is not part of the [Incident Coordinators Group](https://giantswarm.app.opsgenie.com/teams/dashboard/f02504a3-83d4-4ea8-b55c-8c67756f9b2e/main), so the engineer will need to escalate the issue to get someone from that team. For that reason, when you create an incident channel, incident.io shows you a button to escalate. In the end, we need at least two person team to manage a critical incident (communications and operations).
```

![Incident.io Escalate Screenshot](escalate_screenshot.png)

### Investigate

Once the team is built the person assigned to the Operations Engineer role will carry on with the investigation. The Incident Coordinator will be in contact with the customer, via messaging or in a call, and will provide information to the Operator to help with the investigation.

> We leave space to the Operations Engineers to focus on the investigation but we establish 20 minutes periods to get back and inform the customer on the state. Most of the time the OEs will share the findings in the channel and the IC can pin those messages to help tracking the actions performed.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
We leave space for the Operations Engineers to focus on the investigation, but we establish 20 minutes intervals to get back and inform the customer of the current state. Most of the time, the OEs will share the findings in the channel and the IC can pin those messages to help track the actions performed.
```

We leave space to the Operations Engineers to focus on the investigation but we establish 20 minutes periods to get back and inform the customer on the state. Most of the time the OEs will share the findings in the channel and the IC can pin those message to help tracking the actions performed.

In case the Incident Coordinator realize we need to grow the group, he can always escalate to more members of the team using incident.io commands.

### Fixing

After we have found the root cause of the problem we implement a solution, which can be temporal, to avoid any more damage the customer service.

### Monitoring

> Once the fix or workaround has been implemented, we communicate with the customer and move to a monitoring phase, where we stay in stand-by keeping an eye on the metrics and communication channel to confirm there is no a regression coming. We leave the incident in this state for some time, could be a day or two, till we agree with the customer there is no regression.  

Author: ```suggestion
Once the fix or workaround has been implemented, we communicate with the customer and move to a monitoring phase, where we stay in stand-by keeping an eye on the metrics and communication channel to confirm there is no regression. We leave the incident in this state for some time, which could be a day or two, till we agree with the customer there is no regression.  
```

> Once the fix or workaround has been implemented, we communicate with the customer and move to a monitoring phase, where we stay in stand-by keeping an eye on the metrics and communication channel to confirm there is no regression. We leave the incident in this state for some time, which could be a day or two, till we agree with the customer there is no regression.  

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Once the fix or workaround has been implemented, we communicate with the customer and move to a monitoring phase, where we stay in standby, keeping an eye on the metrics and communication channel to confirm there is no regression. We leave the incident in this state for some time, which could be a day or two, until we agree with the customer there is no regression.  
```

### Closing up

> When we close the incident the work is not yet finished. We write down a [PostMortem](https://docs.giantswarm.io/support/overview/#postmortem-process) document to detail all information collected through the incident and share with the customer. We usually create follow ups that convert in tickets to our product teams so we can improve our service and avoid same mistake twice.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
When we close the incident the work is not yet finished. We create a [PostMortem](https://docs.giantswarm.io/support/overview/#postmortem-process) document to detail all information collected during the incident and share with the customer. Any remaining follow-up items are converted to tickets for our product teams so we can improve our service and avoid making the same mistake twice.
```
